feat(skills): milestone-to-tasks + work-next-task for Ralph loops (#2)
dgowrie/claude-workflows: skills/work-next-task/SKILL.md

---
name: work-next-task
user-invocable: true
description: >
  Run one iteration of a ralph loop against a tasks.json file — pick the next unblocked
  highest-priority task, do the work, verify, commit, update status + progress log. Use
  when user wants to advance a task list, pick up the next task, or step a ralph loop.
---

# Work Next Task

One iteration of a ralph loop over `.claude/milestones/<slug>/tasks.json`. Pick, work, verify, commit, exit.

Composes with:

- `/loop /work-next-task` — in-session convenience (carries session context, less Ralph-pure)
- `scripts/ralph.sh` — headless shell harness for capital-R Ralph runs (fresh process per iteration, file-only state)

## Contract

**Inputs:** `.claude/milestones/<slug>/tasks.json` + `.claude/milestones/<slug>/progress.md`. Must already exist — run `/milestone-to-tasks` first.

**Default mode:** standard (single-worker, local-only). `--autonomous` enables push + draft PR + multi-worker discipline.

**Mutation surface in `tasks.json`:** only `status` on a single task per iteration. Nothing else is touched. The user owns `priority`, `blocked_by`, `steps`, `description` — these are the living spec.

> **progress.md discipline:** append new entries at the **top** (reverse-chronological). **Never edit or delete existing entries.** The two-commit discipline and `git diff` review catch violations.

Author: :zap: 71c182f - reworded to "prepend new entries at the top"; "append at top" was self-contradictory (append = end, top = start).

## Iteration

### 1. Find and load context

Locate `.claude/milestones/<slug>/tasks.json`. If multiple `<slug>` directories exist, ask the user (or accept `--slug`).

Read `tasks.json` and the top ~20 entries from `progress.md`.

### 2. Fetch (autonomous mode only)

```bash
git fetch
git rebase origin/<current-branch>
```

Ensures peer workers' status flips and claims are visible before selecting. Shrinks the race window.

### 3. Select

Find tasks where:

- `status == "open"`, AND
- All `blocked_by` ids have `status == "done"`

Among candidates, pick highest `priority` (P0 > P1 > P2). Tiebreak: lowest `id`.

> **Retry-cap check:** before committing to the task, count recent `reverted to open` entries for its id in `progress.md`. If count >= `config.max_retries_per_task`, skip the task and halt:

Author: **🟡 Warning — retry-cap lookback vs. progress.md read window**

Step 1 (L35) reads "top ~20 entries" of `progress.md`; this retry-cap check counts "recent `reverted to open` entries for its id". If a task's 3 reverts are spread across a long log (interleaved with other tasks' activity), the top-20 window can undercount and silently bypass the retry cap — the exact failure mode the cap is meant to prevent.

Fix by widening the retry-cap read to the full file (independent of step 1's display window):

```suggestion
**Retry-cap check:** before committing to the task, count `reverted to open` entries for its id across the *entire* `progress.md` (not the top-20 window loaded in step 1). If count >= `config.max_retries_per_task`, skip the task and halt:
```

Author: :zap: cf50c5d - retry-cap scan now reads the entire `progress.md`, decoupled from step 1 -s top-~20 display window.

- Append drift/halt entry to progress.md
- Emit `<promise>HALT</promise>` with reason "T<id> exceeded retry cap, needs human review"

**No candidates:**

- If ALL tasks have `status: done` → prompt for cleanup (step 9), then emit `<promise>MILESTONE_COMPLETE</promise>`.
- Otherwise → emit `<promise>HALT</promise>` with reason "no unblocked tasks; waiting on in_progress tasks".

### 4. Drift check

```bash
gh issue view <github_issue> --json title,state,labels
```

Compare upstream `title`, `state`, `labels` to the tasks.json entry. If `state: closed` upstream or labels have changed materially, halt:

- Append drift entry to progress.md
- Emit `<promise>HALT</promise>` with reason "drift detected on T<id>"

> Body changes are expected (maintainers edit descriptions). Do not treat as drift.

Author: :zap: 71c182f - dropped `labels` from the drift check; compares upstream `title` and `state` only (aligns with the stored schema, which has no `labels` field). Same root cause as C1. Body changes remain expected-and-ignored.

### 5. Claim

- Checkout branch `<user>/<type>_T<id>-<slug>` (create if needed). `<user>` from `gh api user -q .login`. `<type>` from the task entry. `<slug>` kebab-cased from task title.
- Update `tasks.json`: set `status: in_progress` on the selected task **only**.
- Append pickup entry to `progress.md` (template below).
- Commit: `chore(tasks): T<id> open → in_progress`.

**Autonomous only:** push the claim commit immediately so peer workers see it on their next fetch.

### 6. Work

Read the canonical GH issue body via `gh issue view <github_issue>`. Implement the change end-to-end. Use the task's `description` + `steps` as the spec. Everything below that level (approach, file layout, ordering) is yours to decide.

### 7. Verify

Walk every item in the task's `steps[]` as an acceptance gate. If any step fails:

- Do **not** commit code changes.
- Revert `status: in_progress → open` in tasks.json.
- Append failure entry to progress.md (template below).
- Commit: `chore(tasks): T<id> reverted to open`.
- **Autonomous only:** push the revert commit.

> - Exit silently (no completion token). Normal iteration — loop continues.

Author: **🔴 Bug — uncommitted code changes leak into the next iteration**

The failure path says "Do **not** commit code changes" but never instructs the worker to discard or stash them. After the revert commit at L98, unstaged/untracked code edits persist in the working tree; the next iteration then checks out a new task branch with stale edits still present, contaminating its diff and potentially its success-path commit.

Spec needs an explicit reset step before the revert commit. Suggested replacement for the whole failure-path bullet list:

```suggestion
- Discard uncommitted code changes: `git restore --staged . && git restore .` (plus `git clean -fd` for new files). Preserve only `tasks.json` and `progress.md` edits for the revert commit.
- Revert `status: in_progress → open` in tasks.json.
- Append failure entry to progress.md (template below).
- Commit: `chore(tasks): T<id> reverted to open` (staging only tasks.json + progress.md).
- **Autonomous only:** push the revert commit.
- Exit silently (no completion token). Normal iteration — loop continues.
```

Author: :zap: cf50c5d - added `git restore --staged . && git restore .` + `git clean -fd` before the revert commit, ordered before the tasks.json/progress.md edits so they apply on top of the clean baseline from the step-5 pickup commit.

If all steps pass, continue.

### 8. Commit (success path)

Two discrete commits per iteration:

1. **Code commit:** `<type>(<scope>): <summary> (refs T<id>, #<github_issue>)`
2. **Task update commit:** `chore(tasks): T<id> → done`
   - Flip `status: done` in tasks.json.
   - Append success entry to progress.md.
   - Stage tasks.json and progress.md together.

**Autonomous only:** push the branch. Open a draft PR:

```bash
gh pr create --draft \
  --title "<type>: <summary>" \
  --body "Closes #<github_issue>

Part of milestone task T<id>."
```

Include the PR number in the progress entry.

### 9. Check for completion

If ALL tasks in `tasks.json` now have `status: done`, prompt:

> All tasks complete. Delete `.claude/milestones/<slug>/`? (y/N)

- **On confirmation:** delete the directory, commit `chore(tasks): cleanup completed milestone <slug>`, emit `<promise>MILESTONE_COMPLETE</promise>`.

> - **On decline:** emit `<promise>MILESTONE_COMPLETE</promise>` anyway; artifacts remain for inspection.

Author: **🟡 Warning — interactive cleanup prompt is unreachable under `ralph.sh`**

Step 9 prompts the user ("Delete `.claude/milestones/<slug>/`? (y/N)"), but the reference harness invokes `claude -p` (non-interactive) at `scripts/ralph.sh:29`. In a headless run there is no one to answer the prompt — behavior depends on whether the skill blocks waiting for input, times out, or defaults silently. Spec is ambiguous at the exact moment `MILESTONE_COMPLETE` needs to be emitted.

Pick one:
- Couple `--autonomous` to "no prompts, default to keep artifacts" and document it here.
- Add a distinct `--no-prompt` flag that `ralph.sh` passes through, and have step 9 branch on it.

Either way, document the resolution inline so future maintainers don't re-discover the ambiguity.

Author: already addressed in e556b5f - step 9 now splits into Standard (prompt) and Autonomous (no prompt, default to keep artifacts) branches; the Contract block at the top references both prompt sites (steps 1 and 9).
